---
title: "When Baking Comes to Life"
date: 2020-10-31T00:00:10+05:30
description: "A short article on baking for a cause"
type: "post"
image: "images/the-bikers-cake.jpg"
categories: 
  - "Article"
tags:
  - "Article"
---

From doodles of cartoon characters to the mighty super heroes, from delicate butter cakes to the richest fondant cakes, Rona Marlene Pinto has the ability to open the doors of a kid's boundless paradise and bring it to reality through her innovative extravaganza of themed cakes. 
Rona completed her schooling in Mangaluru and did her post graduation in Clinical psychology at SNDT College, Mumbai in 2009. She later worked in a therapy centre for autistic kids for 3 years in Bengaluru.”I used to work with children with autism .I worked under someone else in the beginning. Then I moved on to do something on my own. I had a small therapy centre where we had therapy classes for development and behaviour issues for autistic kids. It was a full -filling job. I really enjoyed it because there was something new every day. But somewhere along the line I felt that I needed to take a break", she explains.


Passion – Driven 
Lucky are the ones who can turn a hobby into a profession. Baking which started as a fun filled past time for Rona Pinto, turned into a home grown profession. When asked about her love for baking, Rona Pinto says “It started as a hobby. I loved to bake as a kid. Almost everything was self –taught, I never went to baking classes. I learnt everything through trial and error. In the beginning I tried recipes which my mom collected over the years. I used to watch a lot of cooking shows too. After I got married and moved to Bengaluru, I started trying out new recipes. My husband loves sweets and cakes. I could experiment because I knew someone would eat it! It’s been about a year and a half since baking became her calling. She followed her passion for cooking. “I needed a break from work. It was supposed to be a short break. I decided that I might as well spend time improving .It began with baking for family and friends. They insisted that I should start baking for others, since they thought I was good at it “.Rona received immense support from her friends which added fuel to her baking career.”My friends recommended me and business grew through word of mouth. Soon I started receiving orders from unknown people”. Rona went with the flow .She didn’t have a definite plan when she first started. It is now a full time profession. She remarks, “It really clicked. I’m doing it because I love doing it!” 


Make it themed!
Rona has a face book page www.facebook.com/goodnessbake where it displays an array of mouthwatering spectacular themed cakes. In addition to that, her blog chefonduty.blogspot.in skillfully teaches the intricate task of baking cakes and contains recipes of numerous other delightful dishes. 
She makes a variety of delicacies namely chocolate truffle cookies, cupcakes and fondant cakes. “I bake fondant cakes the most, because it’s now a trend to have themed parties. Children’s birthday parties have themes that require Chhota Bheem, Princess and Barbie based cakes. Kids love to see something realistic that is edible as well, and it excites them if it’s their favourite cartoon characters. I love making those because you have to be creative to make a cake to look realistic and that’s what I enjoy the most”.
Fondant is a type of icing used for decorating cakes. It’s made of powdered sugar combined with other ingredients. It is also called as ‘Baker’s play dough’. While inquiring about her first client she replies, “She was a friend of mine from college. I baked a rainbow cake .Well, it was supposed to be a rainbow cake! I couldn’t get the layers right. It was a mixed multi-colored cake at the end without definite layers. But it tasted good!” laughs Rona. Most of the cakes are prepared according to the client’s preferences.” It’s exactly how they want it starting right from the color, flavor to the characters. It’s the small details which count the most.”.
The clients seldom come to Rona without any specific preferences in mind.” Usually I make cakes for children and they know what they want or which cartoon characters they prefer. Sometimes for a kid’s first birthday cake, I had clients telling me that they want something different or they want something pretty and ask me to do what I think is best. In that case, they only choose the flavor and leave the design entirely to me and occasionally I incorporate their suggestions with mine. It rarely occurs because usually people have themed parties and the cake has to go with the theme”.
Rona bakes customized cakes like ‘Barney on the beach’, Dora themed, farm themed, Jungle –themed cakes and craft-themed cupcakes -you name it and she bakes it. She prepares cakes for various occasions like birthdays, baby showers and family functions. People give orders through phone calls, or through the face book page.” They say what designs they want. Almost everything is done over the phone. Sometimes I only meet the client when they come to pick up the cake.” While asking about her clients’ reaction to the cakes, Rona responds, “A lot of them are amazed when they first see it. The little details impress them the most. Once I was asked to make a cake with a design ‘of a guy riding the bike’, the client had sent me a picture of her husband since it was her husband’s birthday and asked me to’ try to make the guy to look like him’. I got the intricate details of the hair and the bike right and the client was extremely happy. People are happy to see things that they like being made in something edible.”


Baking for a humanitarian cause
Rona has participated in a couple of bake sells organized by “the bake collective” in Bengaluru to raise funds for different social causes. One was to collect money for the charity “The voice Of Stray Dogs”. Rona shares her experience saying, “I enjoyed there. We all love to do a little more charity but we don’t really make time for it. So when an opportunity arrives, I go for it. You also meet a lot of other bakers and you get to know and discuss a lot of other things that are happening in the baking world. You also make new friends. It is a great experience and it goes for a needy cause. It’s nice to know that you can help in some way”. Passion and purpose go hand in hand for Rona.