---
title: "An Unfinished Song (1910) - A book review"
date: 2020-10-30T00:00:10+05:30
description: "Analysis of the book 'An Unfinished Song (1910)' by Swarnakumari Devi"
type: "post"
images: ["/images/oldBook.jpg"]
# categories: 
#   - "Book Review"
tags: ["Book Review"]
---

In the preface of the novel An Unfinished song (1910), Swarnakumari Devi Ghosal mentions that the novel An Unfinished Song was mainly intended for the western audience. Her intention was to highlight the changes undergone by the Indian society by offering the unfamiliar readers a glimpse into the social reality of Indian life. She notes the influence of western ideals changing the mindset of the Indian population, but she also stresses the ever-present quality of Indianness. She is of the opinion that it is indeed possible for two seemingly opposite concepts to exist simultaneously thereby eliminating the need for the anxiety of the eventual ceasing of the culture. She does not take the western customs in a negative light and instead believes that it has the potential to improve the conditions of women. The novel An Unfinished Song could be seen as an attempt to define this hybridity. It also gives the message that women should not be forced to choose between tradition and modernity. 

Swarnakumari Devi points to a radical digression from the prevailing mindset of the time. It reflects her attempt to blend and create harmony between traditional and modern ideas, in the hopes of representing the ‘Indian way of life’. It denotes the female point of view and their concerns in a new language that is by the women themselves depicting their subjective experiences. In the opening chapter, Swarnakumai Devi points out that the way women understand time is different as they never forget an event, embedded in their memory. This instance draws attention to the diversity of individual experiences, thereby giving importance to the unique consciousness seen in women’s writing. The newly emerged women literature was in the experimental stage. Swarnakumari Devi pays attention to the female voices of the private sphere thereby stressing its importance 
	
The protagonist of the novel, Moni charts her own destiny. She actively engages with the outside world and exercises autonomy while choosing her life partner. She seems to acquire the self- realization of the qualities she is looking for in her life partner. The freedom to choose one’s life partner was denied to women then. Their lives were played out according to the whims of the society rendering them powerless under its authority. Deviating from the conventional norms, Moni steps out of the societal restrictions, digressing from the expected role of the female of her time, thereby paving way to the emergence of the ‘new woman’ who was self realised in her choices.  
Swarnakumari Devi explores with the notion of individual freedom in the novel. The protagonist does not believe that she has to accept the groom just because the family had asked her to marry. 
“The one object of a maiden’s life is matrimony; she must be given to a desirable bridegroom, that is the goal of her existence. If she finds a worthy man who professes to love and she is willing to marry her, she must consider that her future is assured…..A husband’s love truly is sufficient to counterbalance all the miseries that life can bring, but when that love is wanting what will constitute a woman’s life?” (Devi 2008, 50) 

This exercise of freedom of choice marks an important distinction because in most cases of marriage, women never had any control over the decision. In the novel, the protagonist refutes the general opinion that the fate of the woman is inevitable. Instead she takes control of her life by exercising freewill in choosing the life partner of her choice which was previously unheard of in the practice of child marriage. Women felt that their life wasn’t their own, that they were merely a puppet in the bigger scheme of things, but Moni rebelled against that notion.   
In chapter IV, Moni overhears the conversation between the doctor and Romanath wherein they converse about an English woman that Romanth was already engaged to. After this discovery, Moni decides to terminate her engagement with her fiancé, Romanath. After voicing her concerns with her sister, to her surprise she finds out that her sister does not find Romanath's behaviour immoral instead she accuses Moni of overreacting. Moni initially remains steadfast in her conviction of not marrying Romanath by avoiding his advancements. But, towards the end of chapter VII, by the influence of her sister's words, she agrees to forgive Romanath. Her sister's opinions indicate a strong sense of orthodox assumptions as she mentions how the English woman must have played with the feelings of Romanath and how Moni being a woman should not be so careless, as society will ostracize her. It implies how Moni does not have any control over her life as her fixed engagement is in the hands of fate. In chapter IX after a momentary lapse of judgement, Moni resists the idea of fate and in a moment of self-assertion refuses to marry Romanath. She stands up for herself while conversing with her and formally breaks of the engagement herself as her suspicions grow regarding his immoral behaviour. When her father asks to marry her off to the groom of his choosing, Moni declares that she will rather remain unmarried instead of being married to the person she does not love. She even suggests that she would dedicate her life in serving the country. This was a bold statement as the mere suggestion of it implies the possibility of a woman engaging actively in the public sphere as a political activist. Towards the end, in chapter XIX, Moni without hesitation, declares her love to doctor Binoy. This goes to show that Moni took active participation in the events of her life by not letting the orthodox practices of forced marriage impact her life. She refused to be a passive subject of fate.

Tradition is commonly associated with the spiritual and the feminine. The women were secluded in the inner part of the house, inhabiting the domestic sphere. In the first chapter, the following lines, “Men will smile when I tell them of this lack of knowledge; they will grow sceptical over my simplicity....” (Devi 2008, 9) points out that the notion of time is different for men and women. For men, time is logical and numerical but for women, it is determined by memories. The author emphasizes that the women's narrative is equally important as well. She unashamedly admits that “when asked the exact date of some bygone event, I would not ask anyone to place reliance on our statements” (Devi 2008, 9) According to her, it is not considered as a failure or  weakness on the part of the woman for not understanding the logistics of time. She merely draws attention to a whole new perspective regarding the notion of time. She further proceeds to inform the educated readers, the intricacies of the workings of the domestic realm. “We remember days by events, and only those days interest us… for instance, recall my sister's marriage” (Devi 2008, 9-10) the remembrance of a particular moment in time are often associated with the emotion one experiences. The marriage of a sister is one of the most significant occasion in the life of a woman. The author describes the scene in great detail using the imagery of nature “Before my mind's eye ... moonlight night in the month of Falgoon…” (Devi 2008, 9-10) She remembers the event with clarity by not limiting herself to mere digits of time. The domestic narrative is often misunderstood due to the failure to understand it and thereby it is assumed to be insignificant. They might fail to recollect events such as one’s year of birth, but they make up for the loss of this minute bit of information by recalling other significant events with painstaking detail. The character Moni does not remember her birth year. She does not consider it as important and even informs us of her rationale behind it. She points that the knowledge, or the lack of this knowledge does not reduce or increase a person's lifespan. Since it does not depend on the person’s ability to remember, it is not to be considered as significant. She uses an unapologetic tone and is confident in her assessments.

The author blends the western and Indian ideas of matrimony. “That woman is blessed who, having found her idol, surrenders herself in worship to him entirely…That man is  blessed… dedicates himself to her...” (Devi 2008, 33) On one level, this can be viewed as traditional thinking but at the same time, the husband is expected to reciprocate and devote himself to his wife entirely. The author believes in companionate marriage but expects to “feel in her own consciousness that the beloved had been hers in lives of the past and would be hers again in lives to come.” (Devi 2008, 33)

Amid the controversy of the 1891 age of consent Bill, Swarnakumari Devi could not directly voice her opinions on it. Through the work An Unfinished song, the author indirectly addresses the issue. The character, Moni is a nineteen-year-old unmarried woman who believes in the idea of companionate marriage. She resists the idea of fate by taking control of her own life. She takes conscious decision in choosing her partner even going against the opinions of her family members. Through her idea of companionate marriage, she manages to blend both the western and Indian idea of marriage. It is a companionate marriage, but it’s not limited to one lifetime but many past lives and more to come. She considers her husband as an ‘idol’ which is an Indian notion of marriage. But she also expects her husband to be equally devoted to her. Her main concern is on the notion of love, as a requirement for marriage. The author was of the notion that the domestic space when empowered with education would thrive. The work An Unfinished Song takes the woman as an individual who has the liberty to take decisions regarding her own life. These complex interplay points towards the harmony between tradition and modernity. The transitions between them are undertaken so seamlessly that there is an absence of tension between the two. In fact, the author attempts to maintain balance between the Indian and western values so that they could co-exist together.

A discussion regarding George Eliot and Shakespeare takes place in the drawing room of the ‘bhadralok’ household between the two male figures. Swarnakumari Devi through the role of Dr. Binoy voices the feminist point of view, centering the conversation around the underrated women literature and its great potential. The 19-year old Moni believes in the notion of companionate marriage as opposed to the practice of child marriage which was common at that time. The novel implicitly criticizes the practice of child marriage. The idea of companionate marriage stresses the importance given by the author to the freedom of choice of an individual. Hence her works was concerned with the ‘woman’s question’, capturing the ways in which woman had to navigate the dominant ideologies of that time in order to resist and, forge a separate identity.


About the Author 

Swarnakumari Devi was born in 1856 to the renowned Tagore family as the tenth child of Debendranath Tagore and Sarada Devi. Her father, Debendranath Tagore along with Ram Mohan Roy, was one of the founders of the Brahmo Samaj, a reformist society founded in 1828. She had dual influences of her parents. Her father being a reformist figure, encouraged his daughters to study and her mother inculcated Indian values in her. Swarnakumari Devi learnt to respect tradition from her mother and her dedication to reform and progress from her father. The most notable member of the family was undeniably Swarnakumari’s younger brother, poet and novelist Rabindranath Tagore. But Swarnakumari Devi was also a distinguished poet, novelist, playwright of her time, and she can be viewed as a one of the precursors embarking the era of women’s writing in Bengal during the late 19th and early 20th century time period. 

Swarnakumari Devi began her writing career at an early age. One of her early works, the novel ‘Dipnirban’ (‘The Snuffing Out of the Light’) was published anonymously in the year 1870, when she was about thirteen. It received praiseworthy critical reviews and, one of them was from her brother Satyendranath Tagore, who was pleasantly surprised that a book of such great merit had been written by a young Bengali woman. Over the years, she wrote about twenty-five Bengali books, some of the novels among them were ‘Chinna Mukul’ (A Picked Flower)(1879), ‘Phulermala’ (1894), Kahake (An Unfinished Song,) (1898) and a historical novel, Virodha(Revolt) (1890) and two volume novel, Snehalata and Palita) (1892 and 1893) . The ‘plays’ include Raj- Kanya (1913) and deb Kautak (1905) She even composed ‘farces’ (a comic dramatic work) Kautuk Natya (1901) and Koney Badal (1906) and several short stories.

Swarnakumari Devi was married at the age of thirteen to Janakinath Ghosal, a deputy magistrate. Her husband was in support of her education and literary activities. She received support from elder male members of her family throughout her life, from her father, brothers and husband. As Swarnakumari Devi grew up in an educated bhadralok family, she was always surrounded by engaging discussions in their house. As was the pattern of those times, being a woman, she was educated in the zenana system of school, (teaching that was carried out in the inner quarters of the house)  hence she was not as exposed to the outside world as her male siblings. But because of the influence of the intellectual debates, she gained knowledge in that way as well. According to the customs of that time, she was married off at the age of eleven and had a child at fourteen. Even though she was encouraged to study because of the progressive attitudes of her father and husband, she was still controlled by the conventional attitudes of that time.  

The nationalist movements aimed at achieving self-rule, but they soon realized that the women had to be educated in order to improve the conditions of the nation. The reform movements did some progress to an extent, but gradually there were difference of opinions among the public. Even though education of women were encouraged, it came with its own set of limitations. The orthodox section of the society debated with the question of the kind of education women should receive. Among rapid changes, women had to speak up to address the issues directly concerning them. Over time, the nationalist sentiments took on new meanings. Women came to be embodied as a symbol of Indian values and tradition. This occurred as a result of the orthodox society of that time period.  The women’s literature that emerged during those times portrayed the woman’s perspective and could be viewed as a major step in taking control of their lives. Women were denied freedom to do as they desired, and their existence seemed to take on the role of being merely a puppet in the hands of the orthodox community. In their writing, there existed a sense of self-realisation of their present condition which in turn led to the demand for change. Resistance took the form of expression in literature and the writers attempted to reinvent the identity of a new woman based on personal experiences.  
The quality of self-confidence can be found in the journals written by women and is specifically targeted for the female audience. The journals highlighted the women voices. It became a platform wherein women issues and their opinions regarding the national movement could be portrayed. They began to articulate social issues from the subjective position instead of merely the objective point of view. Reform movements seemed to be dominated by men. The women writers brought in the female voice as personal experience was missing in the general narrative. Through the journals written by women writers, the personal experience came to have as much credibility as the political.  

Swarnakumari Devi was the editor of the journal ‘Bharati’ wherein she addressed the women audience and enlightened them with scientific articles after she personally did an in-depth research on the topic. She also encouraged education as she believed that it holds the potential to liberate women. For Swarnakumari Devi, tradition and modernity could co-exist together simultaneously. She leaned more towards the notion of hybridity as she did not take development as a threat. In the process, she was able to redefine the previous fixed margins, deviating from the limited and narrow definition of binaries.